Update text related to environment management (#630)
ProjectPythia/pythia-foundations: foundations/conda.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Packages and Package Managers
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend you start by installing [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge). This is a specific version of the {term}Conda package manager pre-configured to work with the `conda-forge` package repository -- our recommended source for most of the packages you will need. 

You can install Miniforge by following the [instructions for your machine](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge#install).
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Packages and package managers
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I think we should get rid of this, to be consistent with our advice re: Conda and Anaconda.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{term}`Conda` is a package and environment management system that allows you to quickly install, run, and update packages within your work environment(s). This is important for gathering all of the tools necessary for your workflow. 

We recommend installing {term}`Conda` via [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge) and using it manage packages in your terminal with the `conda` command.
```

You may have encountered a few different package managers in the Python world:

- [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) is the most common method for installing Python packages, which can be used in combination with [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) for creating isolated environments.
- [pixi](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/) and [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) are newer options that are gaining popularity&mdash;well worth exploring for the adventurous learner!
- {term}`Conda` is widely used for scientific computing, and this is what we recommend.

A key advantage of {term}`Conda` over pip is that it manages all types of package requirements, not just Python packages. The most reliable source of up-to-date, interoperable scientific packages are found in the community-maintained `conda-forge` repository (see below).

:::{tip} TL;DR
We strongly recommend using {term}`Conda` to install and manage Python and all your complex project-specific software.
:::

(installing-conda)=

## Installing Conda

> We recommend you start by installing [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge). This is a specific version of the {term}Conda package manager pre-configured to work with the `conda-forge` package repository&mdash;our recommended source for most of the packages you will need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend you start by installing [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge). This is a specific version of the {term}`Conda` package manager pre-configured to work with the `conda-forge` package repository&mdash;our recommended source for most of the packages you will need.
```

In Foundations, we use {term}`Conda`, but there are a few other ways to manage packages that you may have encountered before. [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) is probably the most popular option for installing Python packages, which can be used in combination with [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) for creating isolated environments. We recommend against pip here due to the prevalence of dependencies on compiled libraries in geoscience workflows. Newer options include [pixi](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/) and [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/).

(installing-conda)=

## Installing Conda

We recommend you start by installing [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge). This is a specific version of the {term}Conda package manager pre-configured to work with the `conda-forge` package repository -- our recommended source for most of the packages you will need.

You can install Miniforge by following the [instructions for your machine](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge#install).

> Miniforge uses the `conda` package management system and is based on Miniconda, which is a pared-down version of the full Anaconda Python distribution.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Package management is useful because you may want to update a package for one of your projects, but keep it at the same version in other projects to ensure that they continue to run as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many geoscience workflows tend to rely on relatively complex collections of Python packages and compiled libraries. Frequent updates to packages can also cause conflicts to arise between incompatible versions. For these reasons, it is often best to create tailored computing environments for each project. Keeping track of package dependencies and versions, and keeping incompatible environments isolated from each other, is the job of a package manager!
```

> In Foundations, we use {term}`Conda`, but there are a few other ways to manage packages that you may have encountered before. [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) is probably the most popular option for installing Python packages, which can be used in combination with [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) for creating isolated environments. We recommend against pip here due to the prevalence of dependencies on compiled libraries in geoscience workflows. Newer options include [pixi](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/) and [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/).

Reviewer: You may have encountered a few different package managers in the Python world:

- [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) is the most common method for installing Python packages, which can be used in combination with [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html) for creating isolated environments. 
- [pixi](https://pixi.prefix.dev/latest/) and [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) are newer options that are gaining popularity -- well worth exploring for the adventurous learner!
- {term}`Conda` is widely used for scientific computing, and this is what we recommend. 

A key advantage of {term}`Conda` over pip is that it manages all types of package requirements, not just Python packages. The most reliable source of up-to-date, interoperable scientific packages are found in the community-maintained `conda-forge` repository (see below).

:::{tip} TL;DR
We strongly recommend using {term}`Conda` to install and manage Python and all your complex project-specific software.
:::

> Miniforge uses the `conda` package management system and is based on Miniconda, which is a pared-down version of the full Anaconda Python distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[Installing Anaconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/) takes longer and uses up more disk space, but provides you with more functionality, including Spyder (a Python-specific integrated development environment or IDE) and Jupyter, in addition to other immediately installed packages.

:::{important}
As of 2024, [Anaconda updated their Terms of Service](https://www.anaconda.com/blog/update-on-anacondas-terms-of-service-for-academia-and-research) such that a commercial license may be required, depending on your situation.
:::

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> In addition to the potential licensing issue, we recommend Miniforge for these reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few reasons why we recommend installing Miniforge:
```

> 1. It's quicker and takes up less disk space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It's free, lightweight, and won't interfere with other installations on your computer.
```

2. It encourages you to install only the packages you need in reproducible isolated environments for specific projects. This is generally a more robust way to work with open source tools.
3. It uses `conda-forge` as the default channel for packages, which is our recommended way to get up-to-date, interoperable packages.

Once you have `conda` via the Miniconda installer, the next step is to create an environment and install packages.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{note} 
Users looking for a full-featured commercially licensed and supported Python environment manager should take a look at [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/), which may be [free for academic usage](https://www.anaconda.com/blog/update-on-anacondas-terms-of-service-for-academia-and-research).

The conda package manager and our recommended Miniforge installation are open source and free for all users.
:::
```

You can find lots more information in the [Conda documentation](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) or this handy [Conda cheat sheet](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/user-guide/cheatsheet.html#cheatsheet).

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
:::{tip} What if the package you need is not available from `conda-forge`?
If the package you are trying use (let's call it `my_package` only mentions `pip install my_package` in its docs, or you tried `conda install my_package` and conda couldn't find it, it is likely that this package is not available via the `conda-forge` channel.

As a plan B, after activating your custom conda environment you can install using pip like this:
```
conda install pip
pip install my_package
```

Things can go wrong with managing package version dependencies this way, so it's best to do this only when necessary, and only in isolated environments. See more info [here in the conda docs](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html#pip-in-env).
:::
````

This addresses the last reviewer comment regarding package management. I'm not sure if it should be a callout like this, or just a separate short section of text.

Author: I like it as a callout, since it's relevant to a subset of readers.

You can find lots more information in the [Conda documentation](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/) or this handy [Conda cheat sheet](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/user-guide/cheatsheet.html#cheatsheet).

:::{tip} What if the package you need is not available from `conda-forge`?

> If the package you are trying use (let's call it `my_package`) only mentions `pip install my_package` in its docs, or you tried `conda install my_package` and conda couldn't find it, it is likely that this package is not available via the `conda-forge` channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the package you are trying to use (`somepackage` in these examples) only mentions `pip install somepackage` in its docs, or you tried `conda install somepackage` and conda couldn't find it, it is likely that this package is not available via the `conda-forge` channel.
```

As a plan B, after activating your custom conda environment you can install using pip like this:
```
conda install pip

> pip install my_package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install somepackage
```
